Once around the moons of Neptune
story starts 10th of October 1846, just
17 days after the planet Neptune had
been found.
William Lassal, English astronomer,
using his own self-built 24-inch
reflector, spots a small dot and tracks
its movement and realizes that he has
found the first of the moons of Neptune,
um, which will subsequently be called
Triton, but Lasal didn't give it a a
name.
It was in 1880 that Camille Flamurrian
suggested the name Triton in his book
Astronomy Popular.
It makes sense because it's the name of
a Greek sea god, the son of Poseidon and
the Roman version of Poseidon is
Neptune. So, uh, a good name, I think.
Finally got adopted in 1930. So for 50
years it was just the satellite of
Neptune.
The second one to be found narad was
discovered in 1949 by Gerald Kiper. He
of the Kiper belt prediction and it was
therefore about a hundred years between
Triton being found and Nariad. Now,
Narad is in a very strange elliptical
orbit, but it is flat parallel with
Neptune's equator, which points towards
the uh possible origin story of these
moons.
Third up was Larissa, and that was found
after another 30 years uh by the four
astronomers, I won't read the names out
there, in May of 1981. So, it's uh S for
satellite 1981, N for Neptune, number
one, the first one discovered that year.
What they were doing was looking to see
if Neptune had any rings to see if a a
passing star or in fact Neptune passing
in front of a star and occultting it
would flick on and off as the star went
behind any rings. And it did indeed
disappear very briefly and then reappear
again. But just once, and this was it
moving behind this moon, which they
realized, and they thought they had
probably seen an occultation by a moon
of Neptune, one that was not previously
identified. And so, Larissa has the uh
amazing character that it was discovered
without ever being seen. I think that's
quite interesting. It's quite large, 200
kilometers in diameter and elongated in
shape. And because we'd discovered it in
1981 or at least identified that it
might be there, this image was taken
then by Voyager 2 in 1989 when it flew
past and it was able to recover Larissa
and also find the five new inner moons
there. Niad, Theasa, Despina, Galatia,
and Proteius. And we have them imaged by
the James Webb Space Telescope. On the
right here, you can see them labeled.
You can see the planet and the rings.
And if it looks strange, that's of
course because it's infrared. James Web
is really an infrared telescope. Um, and
we know it's James Webb because Triton
at the top there, very bright, is
showing that characteristic six-fold
defraction spike symmetry that typically
results from images by James Web.
As we haven't been back since 1989, it
is down to uh earth-based or at least
space-based telescopes orbiting around
near Earth that uh are going to be the
ones that can continue the work for the
moment. And that has been the case in
the first part of the 2000s. Five
additional moons were discovered and you
can see the names there. I'm not going
to read them. and a sixth was spotted
but became lost until 20 years later in
2021 when Shepard and his team using the
Subaru telescope in Hawaii shown there
in the picture on the right found two
new moons, one of which turned out to be
the lost one. So, it can be a little bit
of a rocky ride with these moons being
discovered and then lost. Next up in
2013 in terms of order of discovery was
Hippo Camp. This one here we can see
some of the others. So Lissa, Despina,
Galatia and Hippo Camp. So you can tell
it from the background. Very faint.
Voyager 2 missed it because actually
it's quite dark and quite small. So
difficult to pick out. Um Mark Shoalter
was able to use Hubble Space Telescope
images from 2009, stacking them
electronically and combining them to
reveal Hippo Camp and then able to trace
it back into Voyager 2 images um sorry
not Voyager 2 images into images back as
2004 vintage that um uh had missed it in
the uh original imaging.
So in terms of names,
they've picked very sensible ones from
mythology. All associated with the god
of the sea, Neptune, stroke, Poseidon.
And uh the children of Poseidon were
Triton, Proteius, Despina, and Theasa.
Poseidon's lover, Larissa. And then we
had water deities and uh other mythical
creatures. I think they were beginning
to run out when they got to Hippo Camp.
Triton, the largest, certainly a
planet-sized moon, seventh largest moon
in the solar system, 2,710 kilometers in
diameter.
Second largest in relation to its
primary. Well, that's comparing it with
uh uh we've got both candidates. We've
got Sharon and Pluto to think about.
Maybe you might consider those to be a
double dwarf planet rather than a planet
and a moon. I don't know.
um large enough certainly to have pulled
itself into a completely round shape and
to hang on to some thin atmosphere in
the form of nitrogen gas. It's by far
the dominant object in the near neptune
space. It's 99.5%
of all of the mass that is in orbit
around Neptune. And obviously excluding
Neptune itself, you have the rings and
all the other moons, but the vast
majority of the mass is this giant moon
Triton.
Its orbit is circular but highly tilted
compared to Neptune's orbit and indeed
its rotation axis and orbiting the wrong
way against the rotation of the planet.
So it's spinning and orbiting one way
and Neptune is spinning the other. It is
uh tidily locked. It keeps one face
towards Neptune at all times. But that
uh retrograde orbit going the wrong way
is going to be its doom.
I love this picture of the surface of
Triton. I just can't stop looking at it
with the varied terrain. Possibly we've
seen seasonal changes with groundbased
observatories since this image was
taken. Um that was obviously the Voyager
2 flyby. There are almost no impact
craters on the surface. It's covered in
nitrogen, ice, frozen, methane, complex
tholins, and other organic compounds,
and has those black streaks in that top
frosted hemisphere
where it looks like there are liquid
nitrogen geysers
bursting forth from underneath and
depositing dark material downwind. Um,
and the inset picture there, that's just
an artist's impression. It'd be great to
send a probe and see that really
happening for real, wouldn't it? In
terms of its orbit and the orbit of the
inner moons, it's going the wrong way,
as I already said. And this suggests
that it was captured from the Kiper belt
and came barging into the system. Um,
probably causing significant chaos to
the existing moons. We've got the inner
ones there from Niat to Larissa and then
uh the newly discovered one which
doesn't have a name S204N1
in the orange orbit and then a moon
called Proteus there outside of that.
But that retrograde orbit means the
tidal influence of Neptune will make it
spiral to its doom. It'll either get
torn apart by Neptune's gravity or will
crash into the planet itself, but it's
not a spectator sport. It's going to
take 3.6 billion years, we calculate.
Well, enough about Triton. Let's look at
the other moons. And
there are seven smaller moons interior
to Triton. Proteus being the largest.
And in fact, that's second largest of
all of the moons. And then we have some
that we've seen already, Hippo Camp and
Larissa, and the others that we've not
imaged. Uh just shown as to their
estimated size there.
The inner moons are considered regular
in that they are in circular prograde
orbits going the right way around
Neptune in the equatorial plane. And
this suggests that they formed out of
material coalescing in orbit around
Neptune. That equatorial circularized
orbit uh going the right way is very
much characteristic of moons that form
around a giant planet. And it's likely
that they formed relatively recently
compared to the formation of Neptune
in orbit from the chaos and debris
resulting from Triton's arrival barging
into the system and disrupting previous
sets of moons that were there already
causing a whole lot of collisions and
chaos.
Proteus the second largest compared to
after tit uh Triton 400 km in diameter
and that's curious that that is the
second largest but wasn't even the
second or third to be found. Usually we
tend to find the biggest ones first
because they're brightest covered in
craters. one large crater 150 kilometers
in diameter showing some of the impacts
that must have been occurring and it's
orbiting sufficiently far away from
Neptune in a circular prograde orbit
going the right way so that it's uh
orbit is rather like our moons slower
than the rotation of the planet and that
in the absence of uh other gravitational
influences would cause it to migrate
outwards. But one suspects that uh
Triton will have something to say about
that um because of its enormous
influence.
The other inner five
starting with the biggest Lissa 200
kilometers and going downwards u Lissa
being the only one to have been spotted
by Voyager 2 um an image because we knew
what to look for. The others hadn't been
found at all. So the cameras didn't turn
their attention to them. They're in
orbit around Neptune in these interior
orbits inward of the synchronous orbit,
the one that would rotate at the same
speed of the rotation of Neptune. So
these guys are going faster than Neptune
is rotating and that tends to result in
them spiraling inwards. Uh the tidal
effect causes orbits that go faster than
the rotation of the primary to shrink
and orbits that are larger and take
longer to spiral the other way outwards.
Um so these guys are all going too fast
and ultimately will probably spiral in
although again resonances between the
different orbital periods can stabilize
that up to a point.
Now there's definitely a connection
between these inner moons and the thin
rings of Neptune.
Niad and Thealassa orbit between the two
rings called the Gala ring and the
Levier ring. And Despina is shephering
the Levier ring very closely, keeping
the ring particles confined. And indeed,
Galatia is keeping the Adam's ring in
order. and perhaps creating waves that
that result in the five arcs that are
over dense regions triggered by the uh
gravity of Galatia.
Going outwards beyond Triton, we have
the seven irregular moons.
These are in highly inclined orbits,
often going the wrong way around Neptune
in retrograde orbits. And you can see
the names there. Some of them don't yet
have names. They've just got S for
satellite, the year of discovery, and
then the N and the number. Um, and it
seems that these are probably captured
objects. captured comets or asteroids,
objects from the Kiper belt or even
further out that have wandered too close
to Neptune and ended up in orbit around
it. And so that's very typical that uh
such captured things be in retrograde
orbits indeed with high inclination.
It's one of the characteristic smoking
guns of a capture event. and of course
further out as well. Moons that are in
close to a planet tend not to have been
captured by it.
Now, we've only had that one visit out
there by Voyager 2. It imaged just 40%
of the surface of Triton in one quick
flyby. Got that distant shot of Larissa
and a shot of Proteus as well. Um the
question before us is when will we go
again? Will we send another mission? Um,
it would be great to be able to explore
the outer planets in more detail, but of
course it's a long way and you need a
very fast spacecraft to get there. And
what you really want to do is to go into
orbit around them. And that for that you
have to be able to stop as well. So
high-speed getting there, you need some
fuel left to slow down and go into a
parking orbit. Captain Kirk would manage
it, I'm sure, but we are struggling with
the technology, it seems. And so that's
it for my whistle stop tour of the moons
of Neptune. Thanks very much for
listening and we'll see you another
time.